Troubleshooting a Network Issue
Objectives
After completing this lab, you should be able to:

Analyze the customer scenario
Troubleshoot the issue
Duration
This lab requires approximately 1 hour to complete.

Scenario
Your role is a cloud support engineer at Amazon Web Services (AWS). During your shift, a consulting company has a networking issue within their AWS infrastructure. The following is the email and an attachment of their architecture:

Email from the customer
Hello, Cloud Support!

When I create an Apache server through the command line, I cannot ping it. I also get an error when I enter the IP address in the browser. Can you please help figure out what is blocking my connection?

Thanks!

Ana
Contractor

 

Customer diagram
 

The customer's virtual private cloud (VPC) architecture, which consists of a VPC, an internet gateway, a public subnet, and an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instance
Figure: The customer's virtual private cloud (VPC) architecture.

 

AWS service restrictions
In this lab environment, access to AWS services and service actions might be restricted to the ones that you need to complete the lab instructions. You might encounter errors if you attempt to access other services or perform actions beyond the ones that this lab describes.

Accessing the AWS Management Console
At the top of these instructions, choose Start Lab to launch your lab.
A Start Lab panel opens, and it displays the lab status.

Tip: If you need more time to complete the lab, choose the Start Lab button again to restart the timer for the environment.

Wait until you see the message Lab status: ready, then close the Start Lab panel by choosing the X.

At the top of these instructions, choose AWS.
This opens the AWS Management Console in a new browser tab. The system will automatically log you in.

Tip: If a new browser tab does not open, a banner or icon is usually at the top of your browser with a message that your browser is preventing the site from opening pop-up windows. Choose the banner or icon and then choose Allow pop ups.

Arrange the AWS Management Console tab so that it displays along side these instructions. Ideally, you will be able to see both browser tabs at the same time so that you can follow the lab steps more easily.

 

Task 1: Use SSH to connect to an Amazon Linux EC2 instance
In this task, you will connect to a Amazon Linux EC2 instance. You will use an SSH utility to perform all of these operations. The following instructions vary slightly depending on whether you are using Windows or Mac/Linux.

 Windows Users: Using SSH to Connect
 These instructions are specifically for Windows users. If you are using macOS or Linux, skip to the next section.

Select the Details drop-down menu above these instructions you are currently reading, and then select Show. A Credentials window will be presented.

Select the Download PPK button and save the labsuser.ppk file.
Typically your browser will save it to the Downloads directory.

Make a note of the PublicIP address.

Then exit the Details panel by selecting the X.

Download  PuTTY to SSH into the Amazon EC2 instance. If you do not have PuTTY installed on your computer, download it here.

Open putty.exe

Configure PuTTY timeout to keep the PuTTY session open for a longer period of time.:

Select Connection
Set Seconds between keepalives to 30
Configure your PuTTY session:

Select Session
Host Name (or IP address): Paste the Public DNS or IPv4 address of the instance you made a note of earlier.
Alternatively, return to the EC2 Console and select Instances. Check the box next to the instance you want to connect to and in the Description tab copy the IPv4 Public IP value.
Back in PuTTY, in the Connection list, expand  SSH
Select Auth (don't expand it)
Select Browse
Browse to and select the lab#.ppk file that you downloaded
Select Open to select it
Select Open again.
Select Yes, to trust and connect to the host.

When prompted login as, enter: ec2-user
This will connect you to the EC2 instance.

Windows Users: Select here to skip ahead to the next task.


 

macOS  and Linux  Users
These instructions are specifically for Mac/Linux users. If you are a Windows user, skip ahead to the next task.

Select the Details drop-down menu above these instructions you are currently reading, and then select Show. A Credentials window will be presented.

Select the Download PEM button and save the labsuser.pem file.

Make a note of the PublicIP address.

Then exit the Details panel by selecting the X.

Open a terminal window, and change directory cd to the directory where the labsuser.pem file was downloaded. For example, if the labuser.pem file was saved to your Downloads directory, run this command:

cd ~/Downloads
Change the permissions on the key to be read-only, by running this command:

chmod 400 labsuser.pem
Run the below command (replace <public-ip> with the PublicIP address you copied earlier).
Alternatively, return to the EC2 Console and select Instances. Check the box next to the instance you want to connect to and in the Description tab copy the IPv4 Public IP value.:

ssh -i labsuser.pem ec2-user@<public-ip>
Type yes when prompted to allow the first connection to this remote SSH server.
Because you are using a key pair for authentication, you will not be prompted for a password.


 

Task 2: Install httpd
For this task, you install httpd prior to checking the customer's resources.

In the scenario, Ana, the customer requesting assistance, cannot reach her Apache server or get it to successfully load on a webpage from her virtual private cloud (VPC).     

You have an exact replica of the customer's VPC and its resources to troubleshoot the issue.

Helpful hint

You may have to use sudo to complete this exercise if you are not root.

To check the status of the httpd service, enter the following systemctl command in the terminal window, and press Enter:

sudo systemctl status httpd.service
After you run this command, you should see a result similar to the following, which indicates that the service is inactive:

The output of sudo systemctl status httpd.service command shows that the service is inactive because it hasn't been started yet.

Figure: The status shows that the httpd service is inactive because it has not been started yet. This output indicates that the httpd service is loaded (already installed) but is currently inactive.

To start the httpd service, enter the following command, and press Enter:

sudo systemctl start httpd.service
To check the status of the httpd service again, enter the following systemctl command, and press Enter:

sudo systemctl status httpd.service
After you run this command, you should see a result similar to the following, which indicates that the service is active:

The output status indicating that the httpd service is active 
Figure: The Apache HTTP Server should be in the Active status.

The httpd service is now running. Now check if it's working. In the following URL, replace  with the public IP of your instance located in the details button in the Vocareum environment. Open a new browser tab, and enter the public IP of your instance with the following format:

http://<PUBLIC IP OF INSTANCE>
The following image shows the expected output; however, the page will not load at this point in the lab:

The test page of the Apache HTTP server when you successfully install Apache
Figure: The test page of the Apache HTTP server when Apache is successfully installed

 

Task 3: Investigate the customer's VPC configuration
For this task, you will investigate the customer's VPC and their resources.

In the scenario, Ana, the customer requesting assistance, cannot reach her Apache server even though it is active. You have an exact replica of the customer's VPC and its resources. Keep the error that you received when trying to load Apache in the web browser in mind while troubleshooting this issue.

At the upper right of these instructions, choose AWS. The AWS Management Console opens in a new browser tab.

Once you are in the AWS console, in the Recently visited services section, you might see VPC. If you do, choose VPC. If you do not, navigate to the upper left, and choose the Services dropdown menu. Under the Networking & Content Delivery services, choose VPC.

The AWS Management Console and the recently visited services: Under the Recently visited services, you should be able to choose the Amazon VPC service. If not, you can use the Services dropdown list. 

Figure: Recently visited services in the AWS console.

The services dropdown list and how to find the Amazon VPC service by using the search bar or scrolling to the bottom in the Networking & Content Delivery section and choosing the Amazon VPC service 

Figure: Services navigation dropdown list.

Use the left navigation pane and check each service within the VPC to confirm that each resource is configured correctly.

The left hand navigation pane of the VPC and its services which include but are not limited to: Your VPCs, Subnets, Route Tables, Internet Gateways, Egress Only Internet Gateways, Carrier Gateways, Elastic IPs, Endpoints, NAT Gateways, and Peering Connections. 

Figure: The left navigation pane of the VPC and its services.

Subnets - Are the route tables associated to the correct subnets?
Route Tables - Do the route tables have the correct routes?
Internet Gateway - Is there an Internet Gateway and is it attached?
Security Groups and network ACLs - Are the correct rules configured?
Hints

Can you ping websites such as www.amazon.com? If so, you can get to the internet (the internet gateway and route table should work).
Apache is a server that commonly uses HTTP/S as ports.
Once you have gone through each option in the previous step, such as routing, security, and resources. Confirm that the Apache HTTP server is working by testing the following URL into a browser by replacing  with the public IP your your instance that can be found in the details drop down in Vocareum.

http://<PUBLIC IP OF INSTANCE>
If Apache is successfully installed, the following is the expected output:

The test page of the Apache HTTP server when you successfully install Apache 

Figure: The test page of the Apache HTTP server when Apache is successfully installed.

 

Recap
In this lab
  

 

Additional resources
What is Amazon VPC?
 

Lab Complete 
 Congratulations! You have completed the lab.

Select End Lab at the top of this page and then select Yes to confirm that you want to end the lab.
A panel will appear, indicating that "DELETE has been initiated... You may close this message box now."
Select the X in the top right corner to close the panel.
If you would like to share any suggestions or corrections, please provide the details in our AWS Training and Certification Contact Form.

© 2022 Amazon Web Services, Inc. and its affiliates. All rights reserved. This work may not be reproduced or redistributed, in whole or in part, without prior written permission from Amazon Web Services, Inc. Commercial copying, lending, or selling is prohibited.